welcome uh to uh oh no
i mean wednesday evening mode
um hello hello everyone um thank you so
much uh for turning up and uh listening
to this talk so i'm gonna be talking
about an area of extreme controversy
that's going on in cosmology at the
moment um i think the controversy has
got to the point where people are even
calling it a crisis for the fields um as
for what that means we'll sort of
explore over the next sort of 40 minutes
or also um so the title of the talk is
how fast is the universe expanding and i
will pre-warn you this is one of these
slightly annoying talks where i'm going
to completely fail to answer the
question in the title uh the answer is i
don't know um and no one knows but i'm
gonna spend the next sort of 40 minutes
trying to convince you that we don't
know for quite an interesting reason
hopefully
so
just to set the scene go back to the
very beginning um this is sort of a
nice view of the night skies where the
the story of modern cosmology really
starts uh with the study of our galaxy
and uh the uh the discovery of the
expanding universe
and of course if you go back around 100
years uh the general sort of prevailing
view of the universe
was that it was uh quite small about the
size of the milky way galaxy
and also infinitely old and static
and the idea that the universe might
have had some moment of creation the
scene is almost a a dangerously
religious idea or something it was
you know sober people of science
believed in a small sort of milky way
sized universe which was infinitely old
um the first of these two you can think
of those sort of pillars of our
cosmological worldview the first of
these pillars uh began to topple in the
1920s
uh as people started observing these
whirly clouds in the sky which are
called nebulae and they have been
observed for hundreds of years but the
more we studied them and the more we
thought about our galaxy people started
to question whether they were actually
small little whirly clouds inside of our
milky way or whether they were actually
galaxies unto themselves
the person who very famously solved the
problem um is edwin hubble
um who was able to measure accurate
distances to these nearby galaxies for
the first time um
even when we thought the milky way was
the only thing in the universe we had a
roughly uh accurate idea of its size uh
our modern idea is that it's a hundred
thousand light years tonight as monty
python very famously uh said in their
galaxy song and that's about right our
milky way's about 100
000 light years uh in diameter
uh so hubble's big breakthrough was that
he was able to measure accurate
distances to these little whirly clouds
in the sky for the first time and showed
that they were millions of light years
away so they had to be
outside of our milky way and they had to
be entire galaxies unto themselves um
it's a i think it's a really important
moment in the history of the human race
and this came in the light late 1920s so
we're just coming up to the 100th
anniversary of that finding
and um i think it's remarkable i think
it's you know it's the time that the
human race got the news that the
universe is countless billions of times
bigger than we previously thought it's a
very very important moment
in interesting i always find it amazing
when you think of that you know that day
it was 1929 this result came out that
was actually after einstein uh came up
with his uh theory of general relativity
that's the theory that we used to
describe the you know the behavior of
space and time on the largest scales in
the universe when einstein was writing
down that theory he thought he lived in
a little pocket-sized universe
which is kind of extraordinary the
theory is hold up held up so well now we
live in the universe billions of times
bigger than previously
um things got a lot more uh exciting
very quickly following hubble's
discovery though because hubble
astronomers already knew how to measure
the velocity of galaxies
we knew that galaxies aren't just
stationary
in space uh we already knew that all
galaxies in the sky were moving away
from us from our line of sight
when the prevailing view was that these
galaxies were little uh clouds inside
our milky way i think the general view
was that they were being they were
little clouds inside of our galaxy that
were being pushed out by the pressure of
the starlight from the galactic center
or something
um but once once it became clear that
these galaxies were actually all
external galaxies millions of light
years from our little milky way
the fact that they were all moving away
from us needed some better explanation
the real breakthrough came with hubble's
accurate distances remember
before hubble came along we had no idea
how distant these things were when
hubble compared compared to the
velocities of these galaxies how fast
they were moving away from us with the
distances you found something very very
important so this is
to show you a very famous graph now that
was published in the 1920s it's between
the speed of the galaxies on the up and
down y-axis and the distance of the
galaxy is on the bottom here
and
this is what the actual graph looks like
so each individual dot you can see here
is the speed and the distance of the
galaxy
um so the really really critical thing
here is that there is the the dots
aren't just scattered at random across
this graph they lie in this linear
relationship where yes all galaxies are
moving away from us which is interesting
in itself but also there's this
relationship where the more distant a
galaxy is the faster it's moving away
from us they're not distributed randomly
there's this very particular person in
the movements
and hubble immediately understood the uh
the the ramifications of this finding
which is that the universe is expanding
so uh late 1920s the discovery of uh
what we call now hubble's law this thing
where all galaxies are moving away from
us and the more distant they are from us
the faster they are travelling uh that
this this was the the key to
understanding that the universe is
expanding
and
the expansion of the universe then led
over the following decades to the
discovery of the big bang
which makes sense if you think about it
an eternal static universe uh can be
infinitely old you don't have to worry
about a starting point as soon as you
have a universe that's changing over
time and growing it sort of stands to
reason that there needs to be some
beginning points to kick off that growth
which turned out to be the big bang
which underpins all of modern astronomy
and cosmology
like nothing in modern astronomy makes
sense outside of the context of the big
bang
and the expansion of the universe it is
to astronomy
what's the theory of evolution
is to biology for example
so
uh today's talk is try is it's going to
go back to this expansion of the
universe and he's going to try and
answer the question how fast is the
universe expanding before we do that
we're going to have to take a little
detour for about 10 minutes or so and
talk about measuring distances in
astronomy because if we want to measure
how fast the universe is getting bigger
a fundamental part of that measurement
is going to be measuring the distances
to these galaxies
um so why were hubble measurements such
a breakthrough these first accurate
distances to galaxies why was that such
a big deal um the answer of course is
that measuring distances in astronomy is
a really really difficult thing to do
and i think one of the best uh
illustrations of how difficult it is to
measure distances and astronomy comes
from uh the summer triangle it's a nice
kind of example you can point to in the
sky uh so this constellation the summer
triangle it's even it's very big bright
triangle of stars that dominates the
summer sky it's one of the look up in
july and august it's one of the main
things you see
the summer triangle is made up of these
three stars
vega
deneb and altair uh so vega is somewhere
around 25 light years away altair is a
bit closer about 16 light years away
deneb on the left hand side here is
somewhere around two and a half thousand
light years away and it's about a factor
of 100 times further away than those
other two stars
and there's no way to tell that with the
naked eye it looks
roughly the same as the other two vegar
and altair but it is actually
fantastically distant i think it's the
most distant thing you can see with your
naked eye and just by looking you would
have no idea it was special at all
um and you'll see i i so yeah so
fundamentally just by looking at the
brightness of something you can't tell
if it's a very very bright thing far
away or a much dimmer thing close to you
um you can see as well i said then it
was about two and a half thousand light
years away and i use that word about
because we actually don't know the
distance to deneb and there are lots of
uh sort of estimates that range from
somewhere between 1 500 up to about 3
000 light years this is sort of a factor
of 2 uncertainty in our distance to this
star which cosmically is in our back
garden range this is about as close as
it gets in terms of cosmology and we are
completely we don't know how far away
this star is and that's because
measuring distances in astronomy is very
very challenging
um just to kind of just have a home
distinct thing i said before we have
this fundamental problem that when you
see
uh some sort of light in the night sky
all you can actually measure is how
bright the star looks to you right the
apparent luminosity of the star
but that apparent luminosity the data
you get is affected by firstly how
bright the star actually is and secondly
how far the star is away and both of
these two things
will affect
the brightness and so uh if animals have
seen that father ted episode in the
caravan where they're trying to explain
that so that about there are some cows
that are smaller than nearby and some
cows are very big and far away that's
the problem we have in astronomy a very
faint nearby thing is going to look very
similar to a very bright distant thing
what uh the nice thing is that if you
can resolve these two ambiguities at the
bottom like this how bright the star
really is versus how far the star is
away if you can resolve that ambiguity
then you can work out the star's actual
brightness
and work out the distance of that star
so all you have to do is find a kind of
star where you can measure how bright
the star fundamentally is
and that will give you a distance
the way we do that is to use something
astronomers call standard candles so
these were first discovered by a
pioneering astronomer called henrietta
swan levitt working at the harvard
college observatory
so she was working on these stars known
as variable stars so a lot of stars in
the universe are like the sun they just
don't fundamentally change on a short
time scale
but then these variable stars that
pulsate and get brighter and dimmer and
brighter and dimmer over time scale of
weeks or months
and she found this really important
thing that the speed of their pulsation
is dictated by their intrinsic
brightness by their luminosity
and so all you have to do to work out
like the intrinsic brightness of the
star is just measure how fast they pulse
that's easy right you just point your
telescope at the star you see it varying
in brightness you measure how long it
takes to go through a cycle that will
tell you the intrinsic brightness the
luminosity of the star and then you can
resolve that ambiguity and work out the
distance so these pulsating stars are
very useful standard candles that
astronomers can use to measure distances
and this is what hubble did he found
some of these variable stars in these
nearby galaxies measured how fast they
were pulsating worked backwards to get
their their luminosity and therefore
their distance and found that they were
millions of light years away um just as
an excuse to show a pretty picture this
is irish purpose this is a sephie this
is one of the brightest epi variables
which is fairly nearby in the milky way
um so that's fundamentally how we do
this um we use these standard candles to
measure distances so
some of you might be sort of scratching
your head to this point because uh there
is a sort of a hole in my argument uh
you might very well be asking how was
this relationship discovered you know
how did we know that the the speed that
these stars pulsate depends on how
bright they actually are like wouldn't
we have to actually know the distance to
some cepheids in order to calibrate that
relationship
and the answer is yes and this this
turns out to be very very important
um
so the way we do it is that there is
there's a different way of measuring
distances to some nearby stars that we
can use to calibrate that relationship
that's called parallax
um so parallax is a very nice uh easy
demonstration to do if you uh how it's
one of the only this is one of the
astronomy uh demonstrations that you can
actually kind of you know do in a
primary school if you hold up your
finger in front of your eye and
ultimately close and open your left and
right eye you'll see your finger jumping
around against the background like
because your your point of view your
left and your right eye shifts
a nearby object like your finger will
apparently change position relative to
more distant things
and this fundamental idea we can use in
astronomy instead of your left eye and
your right time we use either side of
the earth's orbit so we make a
measurement of the position of a star at
one point in a year and then we wait six
months
and then six months later when the earth
is uh something like 180 million miles
away from where it started we make
another measurement of a nearby star
and just like your finger jumping around
against the background a nearby star
will move around against the background
of the distant stars
um and so this is like this this is the
gold standard of measuring distances in
astronomy because parallax is you know
you can work out the distance just from
very simple like almost like secondary
school maths right uh so if you get
something as parallax you can measure it
just like for sure absolutely rock
solidly
um so it's in interesting side note so
stellar parallax actually wasn't
discovered until 1806 and the the lack
of parallax was used as a big argument
against the idea that uh of
heliocentrism the idea that the earth
goes around the sun
when the argument was going on about
whether the earth goes around the sun or
vice versa people argue well if the
earth goes around the sun
then we should see a parallax effect we
should see nearby stars wobbling around
as our position changes and we don't and
so either the earth does not in fact be
around the sun or the stars are very
very very far away and so that was used
as almost like sort of a cuddle to bring
to be tellius interests um turns out
that the opposite of true of course
stars are actually really really far
away we needed very accurate techniques
to measure their distances
and just to give sort of give you a
concrete example of what parallax looks
like this is the the view towards orion
uh with the parallax is shown and we've
blown up uh the part the paradoxes by a
factor of uh sort of ten thousand or
something so you can actually see the
movements here but this is the basic
idea right uh these styles sort of trace
out this sort of motion as the earth
goes around in its year long orbits and
so you can you can literally see right
the uh the the stars that wobble more
are nearby
and so what we do then is use these
parallaxes to calibrate cepheids so
parallax's work out to maybe uh a few a
couple hundred million light years or
something so still in our course
uh paradoxes are sorry that's something
that's certainly variables work under a
couple of hundred million light years uh
paralysis work out to maybe sort of a
thousand light years or so and so
there's a sort of parallax limit maybe a
thousand light years away which and
anything inside this circle gives us a
rock solid distance and so we find some
cepheids inside this parallax limits we
get their distances rock solidly from
parallax and that lets us understand the
cepheids further away
so yes this has been a bit of a tangent
i promise we are going to return to the
expanding universe immediately but this
general idea
that we measure distances in astronomy
not directly but in terms of smaller
things that we can measure like actually
directly
and we kind of build up is known as the
cosmic distance ladder um we when we
don't measure distances nearby galaxies
immediately but we sort of find these
variable stars we calibrate the
available stars using parallax then we
extend that relationship uh further
around um it work it's like a distance
ladder and we can reach further and
further out into the universe so this
this idea of the cosmic distance ladder
will turn out to be very important so
we're going to return to the expanding
universe now uh but just yeah know that
how this is how we measure distances in
astronomy we'll come back to this
so
we left off with this right hubble's law
the discovery of the expanding universe
all these galaxies are moving away from
us and the knowledge of the universe is
expanding
so
let's address the question how fast is
the universe actually expanding
so if we look at this graph right so
this is great this graph is a bunch of
nearby galaxies that are all moving away
from the milky way and something really
really important to take away right at
the beginning is that there's not one
single speed
for the expansion of the universe the
smoking gun
evidence for the fact that the universe
was expanding
is that the speed increases based on the
distance you can see in this graph even
nearby galaxies are moving away from us
quite slowly and then more and more and
more distant galaxies are moving faster
and faster
so
we can't put one single speeding on it
we can't say the universe is expanding
at you know 500 kilometers per second
and call that a day and go home we need
to we need a way of expressing that the
way speed will increase with distance
right so the speed increase there's not
one single speed the speed changes with
distance we need a way of describing the
way that works
um so just a tiny bit of maths um i
promise this won't go beyond uh beyond i
think yeah seven mass
all we need is the equation of a
straight line y equals mx is the
equation that describes a straight line
and just to make it clear if you have
two axes you've got an x axis and a y
axis if you have some straight line the
equation of this straight line is y
equals m x so what this is telling you
it's how uh this value y increa how fast
the value y increases as you vary x
and m uh is the gradient of this line
the slope how steep it is so m is the
variable that kind of tells you how
rapidly y increases with x
okay so let's get back to our expanding
universe instead of y and x we have v
the velocity and d the distance on the
bottom and the gradient of this line
this number that kind of encapsulates
how fast the velocity or how much the
velocity increases the distance we're
going to call h naught for hubble's
constant named after edwin hubble and so
we've got this equation v equals h
naught d so the velocity of the galaxy
depends on the distance times this
number h naught and so this is known as
hubble's law and then this is the way
we're going to measure the speed of the
expanded universe so the velocity of any
galaxy in the universe is going to be
equal to the distance to that galaxy
multiplied by this number which we call
hubble's constant and so it's not one
given speed it's like a it's the
gradient of that line it's describing
how all the velocity increases as you
push back the distance and this is going
to be the key to the whole question
right measuring hubble's constant is
another way of measuring how fast the
universe is expanding
so hubble's constant is a very important
number um so the rest of the talk we're
going to be talking about measuring
hubble's constant this is how we sort of
encapsulate the expanding universe
it's measured in these slightly funky
units of kilometers per second per
megaparsec
so kilometers per second is a speed of
course and then a megaparsec is a
distance a megaparsec is a million
parsecs or about three million light
years
so uh it's in units of speed per
distance so every million parsecs out
into the universe you'll pick up some
amount of expansion speeds
so what's the actual measurement so the
first measurement we can actually almost
see on this graph so the the very middle
of the uh
of the graph here at the bottom it says
10 to the six pass x that's a million
parsecs that's a megaplus sec so we've
if we follow the middle line up we can
see that it's about 500 kilometers per
second
right so yeah you can see where this
line kind of intersects this is telling
us that one megaparsec away galaxies are
traveling away from us about 500
kilometers per second and then two
megaparsecs away you double the speed
and galaxy's traveling away from us
about a thousand kilometers per second
so
the first measurement of the expansion
speed for the universe was this number
of about 500 kilometers per second per
megaparsec so this is this is the
beginning this is where we started 100
years ago this is the first measurement
of the universe's expansion speed um
it's also completely wrong
and it is completely wrong there's a
very big problem with this um to
describe uh to sort of explain what the
big problem is we have to delve down
into these units a bit more just like i
said it has these uh slightly funky
units of kilometers per second per per
second so kilometers per second is the
speed uh and megaparsec is a distance
but as so but what kilometers per second
it is a speed what is it a distance per
unit time right kilometers per second
distance kilometers
per time seconds so kilometers per
second per megapasc is actually distance
per time per distance
which means you've got a distance and a
per distance you've got a distance on
the top of the equation and a distance
on the bottom of the equation so you can
cancel them out so the units of the
hubble constant what the hubble constant
is actually telling you is just the time
the units of the hubble constant is one
divided by time
which means there's a really nice link
from the hovel constant of the universe
because the units of the hubble constant
are one divided by time you just take
your hubble constants and flip it around
do one divided by your hubble constants
and that will give you the rough age of
the universe that will give you a number
in seconds which is roughly how old the
universe is
and so this will uh you using this if
you just sort of you know
the fact that there's a direct link
between the hubble constant and the age
of the universe the problem becomes
clear so hubble's original value
of about 500 kilometers per second per
megapasc
you turn that number upside down and you
get an age for the universe they're
around a billion years old which is a
big problem that's much younger than the
earth
even even in the 1920s 100 years ago
people were well aware that the earth
was several billion years old they had
radiocarbon dating
so this first measurement for the age of
the universe being younger than the
earth was very concerning
um the problem went away when we
realized that cepheid variables were
actually a lot more complicated than we
thought remember this whole thing is
predicated on measuring distances using
certain variables it turns out that
there are actually two types of cepheid
variables it took until the 1950s to
realize this by the way uh we call them
type 1 and type 2 being very imaginative
as astronomers normally are with our
naming
so cepheid variables it turns out are a
bit more complicated and so once we kind
of accounted for this double population
of cephei variables we could sort of
make the correction and get a much more
accurate measurement of the hubble
constant
okay so i'm going to show you a plot now
i'm going to show you a graph and this
is going to encapsulate basically a
century of scientific work uh in one go
so what i'm going to show you on the
left hand side is uh h naught so this is
on the left hand side are measurements
of the hubble constant itself and on the
bottom we've just got time and so every
single dot is going to be an individual
scientific paper that measured the
hubble constant okay here we go
so you can sort of see here so 1920s
1930s 1940s you can see we have these
really high numbers of 400 500 600 even
yeah one in around 1940 measuring about
800 900 kilometers per second or so this
is all before we understood cepheid
variables properly
from the sort of 1960s onwards we fix
the problem and then you can really see
we really honed in on this sort of low
value of uh somewhere between 50 and 100
so from the sort of 1960s 1970s onwards
we've had a very good idea of what the
hubble constant is
and if we just zoom into this bottom
swarm of the graph here um there's a lot
going on here this is the same graph as
before right so every single blue dot is
a scientific paper that measures the
humble constant and the red line is one
at 50 kilometers per second mega
particle on the bottom and then the one
at 100 kilometers per second for mega
bars
on the top so there's a lot going on
here it's kind of a messy plot but you
can you can see the basic stories so
that the values of the hubble constant
went from far too high um you know
hundreds and hundreds and hundreds to
in the 1980s 1990s we had a good idea
that it was somewhere between 50 and 100
and then we've settled on this sort of
consensus value of around 70 kilometers
per second per megapixel
and so that's one pretty good answer um
and at least when i started my astronomy
career i started my phd in 2007 this
number of around 70 kilometers per
second per megapasc
was a very hard one achievement that
everyone was very rightly happy with we
sort of went from this huge uncertainty
to about a factor of two uncertainty to
having a pretty good idea of what the
expansion speed of the universe actually
is so
this is one pretty good answer to the
question in my title what's how fast is
the universe expanding about 70
kilometers per second per megapixel
every megaparsec of space
every three million light years
will be moving apart with a speed of
about 70 kilometers per second
for referencing to slightly bring these
numbers down down to size
uh so 70 kilometers per second per
megapasc of course like the larger
distances will be moving apart faster
and faster and faster and
ever smaller distances moving apart
smaller
so if there are two points in space and
megaplastic apart expanding away from
each other at 70 kilometers per second
that means that two points in space
separated by the distance between say
the sun and alpha centauri
will be moving apart about the same
speed as sloth warps for reference
um there was a very good paper published
on april the first this year as an april
fool paper which was a joke but there's
a strange cosmic coincidence um the moon
is moving away from the earth um a
couple of centimeters per year or
something because of the energy it's
losing to tides um and but by a weird
coincidence that's that speed a couple
of centimeters per year between the
earth and the moon is about the hubble
constant
so um of course the earth and the moon
aren't actually moving apart because of
the expansion of the universe we're
locked together by gravity but if you
take two points in very deep space
separated by the same distance as the
earth and the moon they'll be moving
apart at a couple of centimeters per
year
um just a strange coincidence but it's
kind of it's fascinating to me that
these very small numbers blown up over
millions of light years become very very
fast speeds indeed
um okay so there's a bit of a strange
history to this i should i told you this
kind of neat story of you know from the
1960s 1970 1980s we reached this sort of
factor of two confusion in the hubble
concert that we knew was between 50 and
100 and then we zoomed in on about 70.
uh there's a bit of like there's a lot
of scientific arguments and controversy
that went into this value so
i'm going to show you now a version of
that same graph i showed you before but
only showing you the papers published by
one single research group
so these were all the papers put out by
a research group led by two guys called
alan sandage and gustav tamann
and you can see they after some initial
high values they sort of zoomed in and
then they they consistently found paper
after paper after paper their group
wrote they constantly found that the
whole constant was around 50.
um now i'm going to show you all the
research papers by a different group so
these are all the research papers put
out by a group led by sydney
vandenberg and gerard de vaca
and you can see they have the opposite
story paper after paper after paper put
out by this research group found that
the answer was around a hundred
um
they would leave these two gr these
groups weren't the only game of town of
course if we put in all the extra work
being done by random people you get
these black dots which sort of fill in
the blanks uh there was a sort of a
review article published around the same
time that said the middle ground between
these two groups was littered by the
battered and bruised remains of young
astronomers attempting to resolve the
dispute
um
of course the the answer turned out to
be almost exactly in the middle one
group thought it was 50.
one group thought it was a hundred and
it turned out the answer was about 70.
um
i find this worrying right um there was
about sort of almost uh almost 20 years
where the world experts in this field
were finding completely different things
when the true answer was about 70 one
group consistently found 50 one group
consistently found around a hundred
um like of course no one was committing
like deliberate scientific fraud i think
it would be sort of a bit more
comforting if someone just was
committing fraud then we could just kind
of throw their results away i think this
is as should serve as a warning that
things like publication bias and
personal bias and wishful thinking
can slightly cloud your judgment and
they may make you a bit of a less
impartial scientist than you otherwise
otherwise might be
um but nevertheless so these two sides
resolve their differences mainly due to
a massive effort from the the hubble
space telescope
uh which you can see in sort of
mid-1990s when the whole space telescope
started pumping out papers that's when
these results of about 70 came along
there was a big hubble space telescope
key project that was given a huge amount
of time and funding to go through all
the data really carefully and then they
found this number of about 70 kilometers
per second and so
um at least when i started my career um
sort of 10 15 years ago this was the
answer
this isn't the end of the story though
um so this is an approximate value
somewhere in the early 2000s we
developed a completely independent way
of measuring the hubble constant so
everything i've been talking about so
far measures the hubble constant by
literally looking at galaxies measuring
how fast they are speeding away from our
milky way
um in the in the early 2000s uh we that
became the the
the field officer of cosmic microwave
background studies it started with kobe
in the 1990s but with this satellite was
wmap uh which
went up until 2004 2005 and then uh with
planck in 2007 studying the echo of the
big bang and it turns out that this
completely independent field of cosmic
microwave background astronomy is also a
really good way of measuring the hubble
constant
um
that's exactly what i just said a new
way to measure an h naught the cosmic
microwave background so i'm assuming
this group has all seen a picture like
this um so i won't spend too long on it
this is of course the cosmic microwave
backgrounds the the universe's baby
picture
um i i think getting arriving at a
picture like this is one of the most
impressive achievements in all of modern
astronomy it's incredible to be that
human beings have been able to take a
snapshot of the universe as it was about
300 000 years after the big bang
uh just to explain what you're seeing in
case of noise and clear so yes this is
this sort of strange oval shape is a
kind of map projection
it's imagine that the entire kind of
globe of the sky is being projected onto
a 2d map in the same way as you do with
the globe of the earth right so
you can take a globe of the f and turn
it into a map we're doing the same with
the globe of the sky except we're seeing
it from the inside rather than the
outsider it's the same idea right this
is an all-sky image of the cmb
and what we can basically do is use the
patterns we can see in this to tell us
an enormous amount about the universe's
age uh the university's composition all
these kinds of things people talk about
the a being in the age of precision
cosmology and that's because we can use
the patterns in here and if you know in
a physics and if you know enough maths
we can measure the age of the universe
the composition of universe with
phenomenal precision
and one of the things we can measure
from the patterns in here is how fast
the universe is expanding we can measure
h naught from the patterns in the cmb
which is exciting because it's a
completely independent measure nothing
to do with galaxies speeding away from
us so it should provide a really nice
check on the work we've been doing
so how do we quantify that happens in
the cmb how do we talk about the
patterns in the cmb
so
you can see there's a lot going on in
this picture right uh you see you can
broadly see and the general idea i want
to get across is that there are patterns
of different sizes you can see like
there was some like there some biggish
blobs like there's a big sort of blue
blob in the middle which gets got uh can
you see my mouse cursor there actually
and there's a big blue blob here which
gets called the cold spots and so there
are some patterns which are sort of
roughly this scale right but then
there's also a lot more patterns that
are teeny tiny um you can see like you
can see there's an awful lot going on so
what we do we quantify the sizes of the
patterns in here and so what we do we
sort of step through the cmb and we look
at each sort of side we say how strong
are the patterns at this size how strong
are the big patterns how strong are the
medium patterns how strong are the small
patterns and we're going to get a sort
of graph showing you the the strength of
the patterns against the size of the
pattern on the sky
i'm going to i'll show you what the
graph actually looks like and then i'll
break down what this means a little bit
more so
when we actually do this when we step
through the cmb and we sort of measure
the patterns at all different scales we
see this so this
is this this graph is sort of one of the
crowning achievements of modern
cosmology it's known as the cmb power
spectrum and so broadly what it's
telling you so up here on the very left
hand side these are the biggest patterns
of all and it's telling you about the
very biggest patterns like the size of
the whole sky are pretty weak and they
get stronger stronger stronger than
patterns with a scale of around a degree
are really strong and so on and so on
and so on
and so
this is quite complicated so i think
this video we should put out by the
european space agency um i think makes
it makes things a little easier to
understand so just to explain the power
spectrum
of the cmb
so you can think of this if you think of
the cmb as being like a kind of a
combination of different patterns so
right here on the left hand side of the
graph we're measuring the like the
biggest scale fluctuations of all
and the these are the ones in that the
oval i just want around you can see that
like those are really coarse
fluctuations
as we move right words on the graph we
are being sensitive to smaller and
smaller things and so we've got the big
ones then slightly smaller ones and then
slightly smaller patterns still
this next one coming up here these are
the patterns that are around the scale
of one degree in the sky like there's
loads of these drives this is like the
strongest thing that we find
that the universe is full of these
degree sizes sort of wiggles in the cmb
then as we get smaller or smaller we go
to the like the fine patterns like
really teeny things
and then on the very right hand side of
the graph we've got these absolutely
sort of minuscule variations which are a
little bit rarer and the actual cmb we
see is basically a combination of all of
these different scales right just the
big ones and the medium ones and the
small ones and the very small ones all
added together
make up the cmb as we actually see it
and so this sort of wiggly line here
which is note which is called the cmb
power spectrum it's just a way of
describing all the patterns that we see
okay so the important the important bit
is that so the red points here are the
measurements from the satellites the
green line is like a fit using our best
theory of the universe and so you can
see uh you know we put in all of the
stuff we know about the universe so how
much matter how much radiation how much
dark matter and then we can just sort of
turn the knobs on this theory until it
matches the red dots it matches what we
see
so the reason this is nice for measuring
the hubble constant is that this first
really big peak is set by the geometry
of the universe which includes the value
of the hubble constant so this first
really big peak is set in among other
things by the hubble constant and so all
we have to do is measure like how where
this beak is and how strong this beak is
and that will give us a way of measuring
the hubble constant which is completely
independent from this galaxy method
so um this was the first result so just
for reference uh this this is not these
two opposing research groups anymore
this is these two different techniques
so the same graph of me showing you what
along the the
uh the values of the hubble constant on
the left versus time going on the bottom
the red ones are the measurements from
the cmb and the blue ones on the
measurements from nearby galaxy is the
way we'll be doing it so far and the
first measurement was absolutely perfect
and everyone was at was delighted about
this so we had this number of about 72
ish from nearby galaxies from the hubble
space telescope and the first
measurement from w map which came in i
think 2003 absolutely nailed it got it
spot on people were over the moon that
this completely independent measurement
got exactly the same value
the problem is as time has gone on
things have got less and less wonderful
things started to get a little bit
worrying around 10 years ago starting in
sort of 2010 2011 2012 as the like the
measurements got more accurate these two
stories started to drift apart and it
started to look like the measurements
coming up the cmb didn't quite agree
with the measurements that we were
getting from galaxies there were still
some hopes that you know as the
measurements got more accurate they
would sort of uh you know get close
together again that hasn't happened it's
gone in the opposite direction and so
these uh two here are the um
oops sorry
uh we'll go back exit down that graph
too soon so these two points here which
i'm going to show you right at the end
are the sort of the latest values about
to come out of the cmb and measurements
of nearby galaxies and you can see they
are not close together uh by any means
right they are completely separate uh
the measurements here this the expansion
speed of the universe that we get by
looking at how fast galaxies are moving
away from us is much higher than the
expansion speed of the universe we get
from looking at the echo of the big bang
so just to sort of put some numbers on
this the measurement that we get from
the cmb tells us the universe is
expanding at 67
ish plus or minus about a half
kilometers per second per mega per sec
and the measurement we get from the
nearby universe tells us that the answer
is 73 plus or minus one
um so this disagreement is a lot smaller
than the old disagreement right remember
half a century ago people were arguing
about whether it was 50 or 100.
now we're arguing now we're arguing
about whether it's 67 or 73 so we've
zoomed in a lot since the old
controversy but there is still a very
very much a controversy these two
numbers do not agree and they should
um so uh what's going on so i'm just
going to say i've got five minutes more
if that's okay i'm not am i away on the
clock
they're all good
okay so yeah so just just to explain
what's going on is there a crisis in
cosmology so at the start i alluded to
this idea that there are some people
talking about a crisis for cosmology
this is the crisis i was talking about
the fact that we can measure the speed
of the universe expanding from galaxies
around us we can measure what should be
exactly the same thing from the echo of
the big bang and we get two different
answers
and we don't know why this is the crisis
so is there a crisis in cosmology well
maybe
um there might very well be a crisis so
there are a couple of potential
solutions for what's going on so
solution one is the exciting one that i
think a lot of people are secretly
crossing their fingers and hope it's
true
the solution one is that we are seeing
some kind of evidence for new physics
going on here uh solution two is the
slightly boring one that someone's
making a mistake
um
so i'm i'll i'll i'll uh explain both of
these sort of slightly briefly uh just
before i finish so solution one i'll do
the exciting one first the idea that we
are seeing evidence for new physics
so what does that mean why do these two
numbers disagreeing suggest that we
might be seeing evidence from new
physics it comes down to thinking about
what we are actually looking at when we
look at nearby galaxies and the cmb so
if we take this picture which some of
you might have seen before this is sort
of potted history of the universe from
the big bang on the left hand side
through the cosmic microwave background
to the universal getting bigger and
bigger and stars and galaxies and so on
um
the the important point i want to make
is that we're not really measuring the
same thing as i said earlier on that
we're measuring the same thing in two
different ways we're measuring the
hubble constant from galaxies moving
away from us and we're measuring the
hubble constant from the cosmic
microwave background we're not really
measuring the same thing in two
different ways that was kind of a lie
we're measuring two different things and
we're using our knowledge of physics to
join the dots between the two
so when we measure the hubble constant
from the cmb we are kind of looking back
sort of 13 billion years
over through cosmic history and taking
what we call an early time measurement
and then when we look at the galaxies
around us we're looking at the universe
around us and taking a late time
measurement so these are the actual
measurements we weigh we make we have
these late time measurement of galaxies
and these early time measurements of the
universe when it was very very young and
these two things are not directly
compatible right the way we compare them
is that we take our early time cmb data
everything that tells everything we know
about the universe as it was when it was
really young and then we evolved that
cnb data forward using all of the known
physics like we put in all the
ingredients of the universe the matter
the radiation the dark energy we put we
start with the c and b we stick in all
the known ingredients of the universe
and that gives us a late time prediction
for what the hubble constant should be
using all known physics and then it's
these two things now that are being
compared right the late time prediction
based on the cmb data plus all known
physics and the actual late time
measurements and it's these two things
that are disagreeing it's not the
observations it's uh it's these two
things here
so
one very obvious uh you know thing
that's going wrong might be this step
the evolve using all the ingredients
that we know step um it would only take
a quite a small tweak uh in in this step
to make the the prediction from h naught
coming from the the big bang come
you know match with the actual
measurement we know uh and there are
lots and lots of suggestions there have
been lots of papers published
over the last few years
with potential things that we can add to
physics uh to uh to fix the problem
um the issue that astronomers are faced
with is not a lack of solutions there's
actually too many solutions we have all
kinds of weird and wonderful things um
including early forms of creative dark
energy at the start of the universe or
time dependent dark energy that varies
over the course of the universe or
strange shapes to the universe or maybe
types of dark matter that interact with
each other or
even new types of undiscovered particles
um they're having many papers on all of
these solutions and they're all saying
that they can solve the problem um the
problem is yet there are too many
solutions and before we should get
excited about new physics we need to be
really really sure that what we're
seeing is real we need to be really sure
that option two
um is not correct uh which takes us to
the second which is the option two which
is that someone is making a mistake this
has happened before right um there was
that sort of 1980s version of hubble
tension
where one group four was fifty one group
four it was a hundred and the answer
turned out to be in the middle uh maybe
we are sort of seeing a modern updated
version of that argument where both
groups are slightly wrong as mistakes
being made and the answer is slightly in
the middle
um if there is being a mistake made
somewhere it is almost certainly in the
cosmic distance matter this is i told
you this would be important later um
this this is now this is this is the
later where this becomes important
all of the measurements of the expansion
speed of the universe
that have come from nearby galaxies uh
involve the cosmic distance ladder and
so if you remember what the cosmic
distance ladder actually is it's this
idea that we can measure distances in
the universe in terms of smaller things
that we can measure more directly
and the ladder actually has many runs so
it starts off with parallax that's
that's the ones that are the rock solid
the the nearest things we can measure
their distance to parallax with 100
certainty and then we use parallax to
calibrate cepheid variables these sort
of variable styles that have all used
but then cepheid variables only work out
uh to sort of maybe 100 million light
years or so which is sort of cosmically
quite nearby and then so we have to go
further away and so we use these things
called type 1a supernova these sort of
exploding white dwarf stars and just in
the same way that you calibrate your
cepheids with your parallax you then
calibrate your type 1a supernova on your
cepheid variables and then you go and
use your type 1 asu type 1a supernovae
to measure the size of the whole
universe
and
you can see there's a sort of a bit of
uncertainty built in every single step
of this every time you take one step
upwards in the cosmic distance ladder
you get a bit more uncertain and so the
nature of the cosmic distance ladder is
that a small error excuse me i got a
fragment right the nature of the cosmic
distance that is a very small error down
at the bottom will blow up and give you
a very big error up at the top so
just as it only takes a very small
droplet of new physics to make the
to make the agreements match up it only
takes a very small tweak to our
understanding of cepheid variables uh to
make the measurements match up um
i think i might be slightly biased
because i work at the institute of
astronomy um in cambridge where george f
staffu
who is one of the big uh cnb cosmology
people um who has been measuring the
hubble constant using the cmb and so he
is absolutely swears double blind
convinced that people are making mistake
with cephei variables
um but then the people on the other side
uh convinced their rights so who knows
it's the same problem that we had 50
years ago right there are two opposing
groups shouting at each other and no one
knows the answer
so yes out of these two things is there
new physics going on uh which would be
very exciting is someone making a
mistake uh we honestly do not know the
answer and this is the end of the talk
because um yes this is what this is what
it feels like to be in the middle of the
scientific controversy this is at the
moment this is not one of these talks
that neatly wraps up and and you know
the answer we are in the middle of the
scientific weeds right now
and uh i i i i i hope we resolve this
soon um i if i'm being biased and i hope
it resolves in the direction of new
physics because i think it'd be very
cool if there was new forces or new
particles in the universe that we didn't
know about but even if there was the
resolution is someone making a mistake
that would still tell us a lot about um
how we do good science and so um yes and
i maybe uh someone maybe we can come
back in a few years time and we find the
answer and tell you what's going on um
as of right now um i think we just sort
of glued to paper releases and we're
going to see what happens
cool i think that's pretty quite a good
place to finish you've slightly used up
too much time i hope you forgive me
thank you very much matt that was uh
perfect timing and
very very interesting indeed
if we if you'd like to perhaps
uh take a few questions if you've got
time um i i would love to take questions
yes
now if anybody wants to um ask a
question then just need to unmute
themselves
and uh go for it don't wait for me
unless there are too many of you in
which case i'll choose
it's always happened stunned silence
so matt i'll ask you one is the the the
hubble
number
essentially like an interest rate
um
it's a sort of percentage
that you the universe expands each year
sort of yeah so it's it's more it's a
sort of a speed yeah it's a potential
that the universe expands each year but
for a given sort of distance in space
right so the thing is that the universe
is expanding sort of equally at all
places um and so the more space you have
uh the more space you have you know to
do the expanding so it moves apart
faster
so
yeah if you take two sort of set points
in space the hubble constant will tell
you how far you know how much that would
move apart each year
but if you take two set points in space
that are further apart then they will
move apart for like further each year
and therefore it's a percentage increase
basically yeah yeah i guess yes
as i was talking i realized that exactly
the same true as interest if you start
up with more money then yes you get more
money and you pay more to the bank don't
you yeah yeah yeah yeah so i guess that
is true yes yeah
that's quite an interesting way to look
at it yeah yeah well on your graph um
where you have the the one with the lots
of blue dots
uh where you said they'd converge to one
answer
do you know the one i mean i do i'm
going back here
three or four from the end
yeah where are we
uh this this one here
yeah if i squint a bit
i can still see
two between 2005 and 2010 you squint a
bit there's kind of a
two rows one is about 50 and when it's
about 75 still
down the middle isn't there
there is i think what i'm not showing
you on this graph is the uncertainties
the error bars like i had a version of
this with error bars but it came in
because it would be ugly and hard to
read
yeah i think the ones the values of
around 70 or 75 or so uh are the very
very accurate measurements with the
hubble space telescope there have very
small error bars um a lot of these are
lower lower values that look a bit
discrepant use are doing funky things
using like gravitational lensing time
delays and stuff like that which are
sort of valiant efforts to do things in
a different way but maybe have huge
uncertainties and so
um right so yeah so yeah the lack of
answer it made the plot a bit easier to
read but yes it's
making you see the full version to get
the full story
okay
i have a question it's probably basic
but um you measure uh the the distance
of the galaxies away or measured in
light years so actually you're looking
into the past if you're making a map of
the universe um do you double up the
times because of course in the time
the light is taken to come to us the
galaxy's moved away by the same distance
um well not not the same distance right
but yes so the galaxy the galaxy we see
have moved away in the intervening time
yes that's that's something that we take
into account
um that's one of the reasons that we say
the the edge of the observable universe
is actually not 13 billion light years
away um because even a very distant
galaxy you know a piece of a photon of
light that's been traveling for 13
billion years will have covered much
more than 13 billion light years
so the most distant galaxies we can see
are
somewhere around 20 or 30 billion light
years away and that's because yes the
universe has expanded um in the
intervening time and so so we're seeing
things much further away than you might
expect so yes like that else that
absolutely is an effect and we take that
into account when we make our
measurements
thank you
um is there
um is the hubble continent simply one
divided by
the age of the universe
or is it affected by the dark energy
yes it's not it's not exactly one
divided by the age of the universe it's
sort of one divided by the age of the
universe so the one divided by the
hubble constant gives you a sort of a
ballpark for the age of the universe and
yes it does not include dark energy um
and so yes so the number it is actually
wrong it's incorrect like they didn't
realize that in the 1930s of course
um but it gives you a rough ballpark for
the age of the universe um
because it doesn't include dark energy
because dark energy and the hubble
expansion are these two different things
right uh there's the hubble expansion
and then this dark energy which is this
extra force on top of things which is a
whole different
you know kettle of worms
thank you uh paul marsden has his hand
here
yes
i was just um
it was connected with dark energy
in that you were talking about the um
uh the errors that build up
um in the one way of measuring
um with the distance factors but um
what is known about dark energy
that can
where you include that in the
forecast from
the
w map and then predict ahead
that must include dark energy
um it does yes so we see the first
effect of dark energy sort of switching
on around sort of eight billion years um
in the past
and
um yes we see the effects because the
the most distant supernova 1a are
slightly fainter than we would expect
them to be
um but yes we we are able to because
dark energies in fact we can sort of
separate separate out these two effects
there's the expansion just due to the
regular expansion in the universe and
there's this dark energy effect layered
on top that we start seeing sort of
switching on around eight billion years
ago or so
um right
yeah
okay so that's that is strongly uh well
known enough um to not not be as major
factor as as the other um distance
measurement uh discrepancies yes that's
right so we only see dark energy on the
largest of scales um so we can actually
we can measure the hubble constant on
much smaller scales than we can measure
dark energy so the scale is still very
large of course you know so we can
we can only measure the hubble constant
in galaxies starting so tens of millions
of light years away but you know
cosmically that's pretty close uh we see
even the nearby universe is expanding
away from us at the hubble speed
um dark energy we can only see over very
very very long distances in these um so
yeah dark energy is something that we
see sort of over scales of half the size
of the universe or something so it's a
it's a different effect yeah okay thank
you
they did
dark energy is defined as being the
expansion like over and above what you
would expect from hubble
and we don't we don't see it nearby we
only see it over very large distances
yeah okay
all right and another one from me matt
is it
the case that um
the uh the hubble value
um
essentially has been
uh slowing down
in the early parts of the universe
because gravity was winning
um slowing the expansion but that more
recently dark energy's taken over and
made things start to expand
yeah yes
the overall speed the overall expansion
speed of the universe is sort of like a
like like an s-curve or something where
yes the the very initial expansion speed
of the universe was enormous so soon
after the big bang there was an
information which kind of spare things
up ridiculously and then the regular
hubble expansion took over and yes for
the first few billion years it was
slowing down
um as we would expect the universe was
still expanding but the rate of
expansion was slowing down but then
eventually uh the universe got big
enough where dark energy began to have
an effect and then the numbers sort of
sped up again so yes this is kind of
funny undulating s-shape there's the the
sort of overall expansion history of the
universe and are we near
is now kind of near the inflection point
it is yes this is one of these sort of
cosmological mysteries slightly that yes
we are we are pretty much you know we
are within a few billion years of the
inflection point where dark kind of the
you know the energy of dark energy the
expansion speaks of dark energy is about
the same as the uh the expansion speed
due to matter another way of saying that
if you look at the
um the sort of the breakdown of the
different energy content of the universe
the energy contained within dark energy
is about the same as the energy
contained within radiation and matter
well i have no we have no idea why this
should be the case um in the past uh it
was a radiation and mata dominated the
universe um far in the future is going
to be a dark energy dominated the
universe like in a trillion years the
universe will be 99.9 percent dark
energy and matter will be a tiny
afterthought like why we should be
living at the point now where these two
numbers are almost exactly the same
is a great mystery i don't know why yeah
i find that to be a little bit of a sort
of suspicious coincidence
yeah i said that there are lots of
suspicious coincidences when it comes to
dark energy to be honest there's this
other suspicious coincidence that the
the value of dark energy is very very
odd right um the there was some initial
so so
there is a theoretical prediction for
how strong dark energy should be
uh the problem is it's about 120 orders
of magnitude higher than the measured
the measured value of dark energy you
know it's the greatest discrepancy
between measurements and
and theory in the history of science
yeah it's from zero point energy of the
vacuum isn't it yeah exactly and so and
you know and so theorists in sort of the
80s and so on you know they have this
enormous prediction for this zero point
energy in the vacuum
and
that would be enough to just blow the
universe up right in no time at all
there will be one atom per trillion
cubic light years or whatever and so you
know they very sensibly observe that the
universe has not done that and so they
are so assumed there was a sort of a
hidden multiply by zero lurking their
equations somehow that canceled this
vacuum energy out
and but then it turns out there's
actually not a multiplied by zero
there's a multiply by 10 to the power of
minus 120 somewhere in the equations
which is very hard to describe
uh you know it's very hard to see you
know like multiply by zero you could see
that being a natural thing coming out of
an equation somehow like a multiplied by
10 to the power of minus 120 is very
hard to see how that would emerge
naturally but see it seems to have for
some reason um yeah again complete
mystery i think thinking about dark
energy you do get these weird
coincidences i think it doesn't take
long once you start to think about dark
energy to start thinking about the
multiverse and the anthropic principle
and all this kind of stuff because i
think things get very fishy very quickly
when you think about the dark energy
yeah i find that certainly
anybody else
okay well um
just before the end do you mind if i'd
be a bit uh slightly self-promoting yeah
go ahead matt yeah so so
if you have enjoyed this um you might
notice i i published a book at the end
of last year called the invisible
universe uh why there's more to reality
than me to the eye so it's it's sort of
a popular level book there's uh no maths
as little jargon as i could put in and
so the talk today is sort of slightly
based on one of the chapters so
it's it's a book that is a sort of a
guide to everything in the universe that
we can't see with our eyes from the big
bang and black holes out to dark matter
dark energy uh multiple universes all
the rest of it so um yes if you'd like
to talk today there is more available in
the book
super thank you thank you also and uh
very interesting
and and he's holding his hand up a
little bit i see 320 pages
this must have been a
vast
uh successful work by you man i
um i've been busy and uh i hope we get
to see the recording of this later
okay yeah i am recording it so yeah
great
well just uh forced me to thank matt for
a very interesting talk do do go out and
buy his book if you're interested um
that all helps and um we'll probably get
a copy for the live for our library if i
think kevin our librarian dropped off
the call but i'll remind him um so
and we can all look at it but thank you
matt again
for joining us this evening um now don't
all
rush away but personally just join me in
trying to